Welcome to the video lecture. Until now, we have learned
how to import data, single-cell RNA seq
data in Python, how to pre-process the data, and how to visualize
the data using umap. It is not the time to work in identifying the cell subtypes contained in our single-cell
RNA seq dataset. Cell type or cell
subtype identification broadly requires three steps. Clustering the cells, identifying certain genes that are highly expressed
in each cluster, what we call the markers, and then comparing
those markers with the known ones for the different
cell types in our study, compare the markers with what is known in the
state of the art. Again, like always, there is
no measure that fits all. Adjustment of this workflow will be always necessary depending
on the data at hand. If we go to the first
step, the clustering. In principle, any sound
clustering algorithm can be used for finding the
right partition among cells. But in practice, some algorithms are
becoming the standard, like the later algorithms
for clustering. Regardless of what
algorithm is used, the end results should provide a clear partition
among the cells. If we go to the second step, once we have defined our cluster, the
marker identification. It consists in finding the
genes that are differentially expressed between each cluster and all the other clusters. For instance, for the cluster 1, this will mean contrasting
the expression of the cells within this
cluster to the rest of one. The differential
expression analysis of the cluster 1 against
every other cells, identify three genes
as possible markers. It will be now time to
find if those are working. When we compare those markers with what is known
in the literature, we identify that the PASK gene is very specific marker
of central memory cells. Being highly expressed
in cluster 1, we may conclude that
cluster 1 is indeed composed of central
memory T cells. However, cell type
identification, it's rarely that simple. More often there is some
conflicted information. For instance, the presence
in the same cluster of two known markers each of them is specific for
its own cell type. How to solve these problems? There is no immediate answer, but we can practice in
the next coding lesson that will try to
make you ready for real case and additional
real cases scenarios.