Welcome to a new video coding lecture. In this video calling lecture
we're going to follow or continue the analysis that we
had started on bulk irony sync. If you remember from our previous video
coding lecture, we have an overview. We did the loading of the data, checking
possible transformations of the data, investigating library size,
in the first video coding lecture. Now we are going to talk about data
visualization and finally in the next one we will talk about the differential
expression analysis between Th0 and Th2. And there is an exercise that you will
be able to conduct by yourselves. Highly recommended, if you have questions, go back to the previous
video coding lecture. But also check the video lectures
where you have the foundations or the basics of introduction to the bulk and also to the introductions of what is
the type of data that we are working with. Just for you to have a brief
reminder we load the data. We are using this in to package,
we account for different aspects. And very importantly we are not
using the entire data set, we are using 5 days stimulation time,
two conditions Th0 versus Th2. And we are only working
with cell CD4 memory. So we got the data, we modify it. Now we are going to help us
understanding about more this data using principal component analysis. First of all two things,
one is do you remember I was running all the code before
showing you this analysis. This code is for you available, so
I would recommend that you open the code next to you when you are looking into
this video, run the code by yourselves. If you have something that is not clear,
post the video check, read the comments here. Feel comfortable with what I'm telling and
do not hesitate into exploring more question mark to
check how everything is working. Imagine you're seeing this function,
question mark, this function will tell
you a lot of information. Okay, so let's start. The first thing is what is
the principal component analysis? If you remember for
the video lecture, it's basically, in our data set we have more than
26,000 variables, right genes. It's impossible to visualize because we
visualize in towards three dimensions. So what we are going to try to do
is to transform the coordinates. So the first coordinate explains
most of the variability. Then we will identify a second component
which is orthogonal to the first one, that explains as much as possible and
so on. We use this function,
principal component, we have the data, we scale it and
then we run the principal component. The first thing that we want to do when
we run the principal component for doing this type of visualization, we
are going to use the facto extra package. It's how much variability is explained
by each one of the coordinates, and this is what we have
in this scree plot. The first component explains
a bit more than 30%, the second one 23%,
the third one 12% and so on. You can see that once we arrived
to the ninth component there is very little added value in terms
of more variability explain. Another comment here is that
with just two components, we are explaining almost 55% of
the the data, extremely important. Once we know, okay let's take
these two first components and plot the first component
in a scatter plot. So we have the dimension 1,
dimension 2, so dimensions for every one of the samples. We have the profiles for the first
dimension on the second dimension. So every dog here, eats a sample. So we observe like three groups,
fantastic, and we have a sample names. What would be even more useful
is if we super pose within this plot information about
the sequencing batches or the Th0 versus Th2,
things like that, so let's do it. We are going to use another
function called plotPCA, available within the DESeq2 umbrella. And we are going to plot
the sequencing batch. We go here, very interesting,
we have two groups we plot. But before we go very deep into this
we should be thinking seriously and be critical with what we are observing. This plot should be exactly the same
one that we are observing here. But we start seeing bit of a difference,
right? Those two samples and those two,
which seems to be a bit not extremely far, but a bit far here,
they look very close here. Their ranges goes from -100 to 100 for the first dimension here
it goes from -20 to 20. And even more importantly,
first component explains 50%, cycle component 30% where we
have very different values here. Okay, why is that? You should be critical and
sometimes you find these discrepancies, don't overlook them, investigate why. You will have a learning experience and you will make sure that what
you're doing is correct. Then, what I did in this case was to
investigate further this function plotPCA. So if I want to investigate further
this function I ran ?plotPCA, I get all the information here. You can see these me two options,
I go for the DESeq2 library and then I get all this information. And if I read carefully this information, I come here and
I have the source code can be found here. Okay, so even can look into the code,
why not? So I try to get the method,
this is what I'm doing here and I got all this code, fantastic. So now for my sake, I'm going to
try to run this code by itself. Because running a function is
basically if you know the values that you're providing to the function,
the variables, then you can run what it is inside, and
this is exactly what I'm doing here. The values that they provide the function
is object, intgroup, ntop, returnData. Object is this one,
intgroup is the sequencing_batch, ntop is the number of things I
want to consider all of them, and returnData is FALSE
because I want the plot. Then I start running step by step, and then the original code
show something like this. Come here, you can see the original code, principal component,
I put the data, fantastic. This is the moment where you
should be checking yourself. We have run principal component before,
let's go to how we run it. We run it before and this is the code but we added something like scale is TRUE,
what does it mean scale is TRUE? Scale is TRUE is within every gene we
are going to subtract the mean and divide by the standard deviation. There are different ways of scaling but
this is one of them, and why is this important? Well, it's a decision to take. But think about biologically speaking, housekeeping genes are very highly
expressed when you compared to for instance transcription factors or
most of the transcription factors. But maybe the variability in housekeeping
genes is not that important for what we are looking, but changes in those values are going to
affect a lot our principal component. While changes in the transcription
factors may be a bit harder to see. So if the scale of the values
mattered in this transformation, maybe we should be scaling them. So it's actually the variability or
the ranges that that matters, how they modify for
the different conditions etc. And if you have this in
the intuition well we can actually modify the code and
making sure that it's a scale. We run it and
we get exactly similarly to what we did before, 32% and 23%. So this is what we got in
the original PCA plot that we did. Which one is correct? Well, both of them are correct but
there was a decision about the scaling that we took when we
computed the principal component and it's not being taken when we
are doing the plotPCA function. So be careful with those aspects,
check details, details matter a lot. Now, once we have looked into that of
course we are plotting information about the sequencing batch one or two. And what we can see here is, well,
for the three groups of cells that we are finding there are sequencing
batches in all of them. So there is no obvious bias
to the sequencing batch. When we superpose information
of the Th0 on Th2, we can see that well while they
may be differences in Th0 and Th2, they do not look to be global. In the sense that samples are not grouped
based on this biological characterization. And you can see that Th2 and
Th0 are not super posing to the same components as
the sequencing batch, which accounts for
a proper experimental design, right? Otherwise, it will be confounded
between the sequencing batch and our biological question Th0 and Th2. You can do more analysis,
investigate further, check other variables if
you're interested, go for it, we highly recommend it. This is why these
visualization plots are about. So with that I will stop here,
go for it, check, double check and then go for
the next video lecture. And then after that we will look into
the differential expression analysis.