Welcome to a new video coding lecture. In this one we're going
to discuss finally, differential expression in bulk art,
music. If you remember from
two previous lectures, video coding lectures
on bar currently DEseq. We started with loading the data,
generating the DEseq6 set, transforming the data,
checking the library sides. Also making oneself comfortable
with the type of data, count data that we're working with. In the second lecture, once we have
these matrix where rows are the genes, columns are the samples. And we have normalized or not our data,
we want to explore it and using principal component analysis for
that. If you have some questions or
doubts about it, go and check both the video lectures and
the coding lectures. In the last one, finally we're going
to work with differential expression. Please remember that in this
analysis we decided not to work with all the data types,
sorry not to work with all the data but
to work with a subset of the data. In this case a stimulus time,
five days conditions Th2 and Th0, and the cell type CD4 memory. We may have different sequencing batches,
we've different individuals, but our differential expression analysis
is going to be between Th2 and Th0. Keep that in mind. The second thing that you want to keep
in mind is that at the beginning I ran all the code. So all these cutting sections
are already done and the outcomes can be observed and
we highly recommend you to take a look. Don't lower this code and side by
side with this video lecture coding lecture work yourself the code and
investigate any questions. This code has been prepared by
Robert Leamon and I have modified it. So let's go to this third lecture. For the differential expression analysis,
we already have loaded the libraries. This is just for you to remind which
ones we are using the DEseq, but also we are going to use two of
them EnhanceVolcano and pheatmap. If you don't have them in your system,
you can similarly to what we did, installing DEseq2, use biasing manor to
install the libraries that we're missing. If you have questions go to the first part
of this lecture where you see examples for the installation of DEseq2. The first thing that we're
going to do is basically process our data set
using the DEseq library. Many of those things are already computed,
we already compute the size factors, check if you don't remember, what is that. Estimating dispersions for every gene, gene wise expression estimates mean
dispersion relationship, etcetera. And then what we are doing is for
every gene we are fitting a model. A generalized linear model that predicts
expression based on the different conditions or the variables that
we want to consider in our model. So finally we want to do
the differential expression, and we're using these functions within
the DEseq library and applied here. So you may think what you have the data, how do you know the question,
how do you know? And you can see here that we
are comparing Th2 versus Th0. Go back to write the first
lecture video coding lecture where we were
creating the DEseq structure. We already defined a design where
we aim to explain the expression of ever gene using the cytokine condition,
the Th0, Th2. We could add more of them like
the sequencing batch individual etc. But this is something for you to investigate by yourself when you
get deeper into this type of analysis. What is important here, design was already part
of the DDS data set, DEseq data structure that we're using. Have in mind, we can check the classes. You can see that DDS it's a DEseq dataset
type which is part of a package DEseq2. Okay, so now we know that when we
are doing this differential expression, you may not have it here defined. But in our case we defined right at the
beginning, we're comparing Th2 versus Th0. And as a result for every one of these
number of genes, we have six samples, we are doing the differential expression,
and and this is the results that we get. You need to get to look a bit into that. What are the important things? Lawful change, lawful change between the two conditions
is going to be very important. The statistic that is computed in order to
see the significance of the difference. But of course at the end probably
the most important columns are going to be the lawful change because you have
the effect of this between the groups. How strong is this effect and the p-value, who's going to tell us
how significant it is. If we have a p-value like this,
that means that under the assumption that we think there is no
difference between the groups, this is a likely value to be observed,
right? You need to have very low p-values. Then another one that is extremely
important is the adjusted p-value. What do we mean by adjusted p-value? Look understanding the p-value is saying, what is the probability of observing
our data, the data that we obtain. Under the assumption in this case of Th2
and Th0 to be to have the same means. Fine, and we then using this
p-value we can set a threshold. Well, if the probability of observing
it is less than 5% then I will say well I'll reject the null hypothesis and
I consider them to be different. Fine 5%. How many genes are we Investigating? 26,656, so by random 5% of them may give differential
expression results even if they are not deferentially expressed. So we need to take into account
that we're doing many tests is a multiple testing assessment. The p adjusted value, the adjusted
p-value is going to account for that. There are different ways, here we'll be using the forces
covering rate, we allows or tells us the percentage of false positives
that we are going to allow in our data. Now, we'll be using the p-value,
or we'll be using lawful change, or we'll be using the adjusted p-value. Imagine we want to investigate,
I'll recommend to use the adjusted p-value because it takes into
account multiple testing. And this is also for you to decide
if you want to use the full change, in this case the absolute value of
a full change because you may have changes statistically very significant. But the lawful change it's so little that you may think what
is the biological value of this? Well, I'm not going into
going in that debate, you need to take the decisions and
you need to be aware of them. In this case, imagine we're asking okay,
how many genes are with adjusted p-value below 0.01, and with the absolute
of the lawful change to be more than 1? If we run this remember the Boolean
that we did in the week one and week two, in r you can see that
the result is a Boolean vector, and for
every true when we summit it's a one. So we have 25 genes that if
we use this criteria we will consider them to be
differential expressed. Now one of the things that we want
to do also is not only to have this table with differential express
genes and all information, but have some kind of visualization, and
we're going to talk about two of them. One extremely important
is the volcano plot, you've here the volcano plot as
an example, and you have here the results. Basically in the cooperate volcano plot,
we're going to talk about x axis, show the local change, so
how strong is the change? And in the y axis we're going to have the
p-value but in order to make a p-value, the larger the more significant we're
going to use the minus log 10 of the p-value. That means that a 10,
it's a 0.000010 decimals of significance. We've a warning because
we're observing it here, one of the things is we could also
look at this, run it it here. See the plots that we get and
also if we want to zoom we can look at them like in this case, and then we'll have lower amount
of points overlapping. What are we looking? What we are looking is there are some
genes that looks to be this is the threshold that we're setting for
significant. So any gene,
any dot over this threshold is a gene that we're considering to be
differential express. And then we've some genes
that are differential express up regulated,
differential express down regulated. Sorry, those genes here
are going to be significant, the adjusted p-values below 0.01, but you can see that the lawful
change is not that strong. So those are the genes that
statistically seems to be significant, but the effect is not that strong. We've another ones here where
the local changes very large, but we don't have enough statistically
significant to define them based on our criteria as
being differential expressed. So at the end of the day,
we'll be looking into the genes here and into the genes here, and
you can have the names and sample names. You can translate into gene symbol
etcetera to look into more biological insights. And this is an exercise that I
highly recommend post lecture, look for those genes, say what they are. Do they make sense in
the context of the cells of CD4-T cells also in
the context of Th0 and Th2, it should tell you if we're
in the right direction. So now that we have discussed these, let's go back into observing
the other part of the lecture. The other thing that we
can do is a heatmap. Let me show you what is a heatmap. We're going to select the genes right? That are adjusted p-values below 0.01. So we are accepting 1% of
all discovery rate and the lawful change more than one, so we
want to have a certain amount of effect. We select those genes which
you can see them here, and then we're going to create a data frame,
yes with those genes. Now what we're going to do and
what we're going to do is basically to have this data frame
of the notation imported here. The expression of the genes that we
identify as differential express added or reference here. So we are going to have a heatmap,
let me show you what is a heatmap. Heatmap is showing the genes in the rows,
the different samples in the columns. But also we could add additional
notation like sequencing batch, the donor ID, the cytokine condition,
Th0, Th2, donor ID, sequencing batch. We have a lot of information in
a very easy way to visualize it. You can see these genes if we look here, those genes are up regulated
in Th0 not that many, probably the ones that we're
observing in this case. We can see them here, and
we've few more genes to be a populated in Th2 the ones
that version here. So at the end you have different ways
of visualize the same information. But this is complementary, and
of course make also the exercise that if you have two plots they need
to be current between them. It's very useful to identify
possible errors, pitfalls, weird things when you visualize
that it in more than one way and you make sense of everything together. And then we'll be looking into those
genes that are up regulated and down regulated, and having a better
biological understanding of them. So with this we'll be closing the last
part of the bulk RNA DEseq data analysis. The next sections we'll be moving into
single cell, and then we we'll have one section when we'll be bringing
together single cell and bulk data. With the intention of bringing
together r when we're doing analysis in bulk RNA DEseq and Python that we're
using for the single cell data analysis. Hope you found it useful. Most important thing,
again check the call by yourself. Get confident, identify you've questions, look question mark any of the functions
that you don't see it clear, and get confident with what is
happening in this code.