Welcome to the lecture. In this lecture, we will discuss differential expression
analysis in RNA-seq data. Let us consider the
most simple example. We have one gene
and two conditions. To compare average
across groups, we already discussed this
in the second module and one of the key assumption
is that to run the t-test, we should be working with
normally distributed data. Unfortunately, RNA-seq data
violates such assumption. First, because the data is measuring counts,
integral values. Second, because the shape of the distribution is
definitely not Gaussian. Over the years, researchers
have understood that another probability
distribution approximate these data better, the
negative binomial. Once we have decided to use the negative binomial
distribution for representing RNA-seq count data, it is possible to assess whether a gene is differentially expressed between
the two groups. In order to do so, it is necessary to estimate two parameters that dictate the shape of the distribution. The two parameters are one associated to the
average number of counts and the other one associated to the over dispersion parameter alpha. The later connects
the average number of counts with it variance. The closer the alpha
value is to zero, the closer the variance
is equal to the average. Estimating these two parameters is conceptually similar to estimating the mean and standard deviation for
normally distributed data. Fortunately, estimating
alpha is not trivial when we are working with low sample size or with
genes with low expression. See for instance, the
relationship between counts average and alpha in the T-cell dataset that
we are working with. The most extreme alpha
values are circled in red, and they may just be an artifact due to
a poor estimation. A possible solution is to shrink variances and over
dispersion parameters that appear to be outliers. Different R packages implement different approaches
for this problem. Here, the most
common packages for the analysis of RNA-seq
data will be used. Now, what we are going to do is explore them in the
next coming lesson.