Welcome to a new video coding lecture,
in this one, we are going to start talking
about single cell rna seq data. And why we explain it in
the video lecture and we already explained it also
the annotated data format, we want to have a practical
section on that, right? So what is annotated data? Annotated data is a python package. You remember we have been using
numpy we have been using pandas. Numpy has been oriented
to have race vector etc. Pandas allow us to work
with data frames and annotated data has been prepared
to keep both in expression values. All the meta data, but
also all the efforts that we do when we are analyzing single cell rna seq
data like cell type annotation etc. So the first step will be of
course importing the packages we have them and
then we are going to load the data. This is a file and remember I'm loading,
I'm reading this file, and I'm reading this file without
any path description because I'm considering that this file is
within my working environment, right? It's important for you to consider,
you have to be aware or what is the working directory
you are working at. And if the files are located within it or
if you have to give the full path. The second aspect is you
have an extension here, H5 AD which is a way to compress and store data is definitely one
of the best ones that has been that is being used for
single cell very fast. And but there are other formats,
let's work with that. And the first step is we read
this data and then it creates and undertake the data object that
includes a lot of information, right? And we have number of observations and
the number of variables. Okay, each profile it's composed of a number of genes, right? Or variables you know
vector data terminology and then we also have observations which
includes cell type, cytokine etc. So what I'm trying to say is we
have different type of elements. We have expression data,
and we have the meta data. If we look into the expression
data basically we have the genes as I was saying before and
the cells. It's not showing us it that much
here it's a lot of values as you can imagine when you compare, but
we know it is a store there and we will see later how to access
even say that or even observe it. If we want for instance to observe
the most expressed ones well, here this is important for
for you to look into. We are getting the expression
data we are sorting it by most expressed to low express. We are flipping it so
we have the higher express on the top and we are saying show us
the first time once from zero position zero to position nine, okay? So we have expression data we start to
see how to access part of this data. This is for you more to get confident
into this data type, data structure. And we also have
the observation data frame. And in that observation data frame for
every one of the cells we have plenty of information like the cell type,
cytokine condition, donor, badge, etc. Some of it it's arrived
from the data generation. Some other aspects like the cell type,
it's maybe related to the notation, and also a percentage of mitochondrial. It's after the mapping you have
quantified how many rates are getting into the mitochondrial. So there are different amount of values
here that are either defined by design. Some others are defined
based on the annotation and the additional analysis that
we are doing in the data. And one thing is to have
it clear what it is inside. The other thing is to be
a bit more comfortable about manipulating this subject and
annotating data object. So one of the things that we
are going to do is basically using this data frame to
work with a naive T cells. You remember what we selected in the bulk,
you remember how we're trying to align everything part of
the data that we are using here? So we run this and basically we are saying
look, within the data frame and the column cell type,
check the ones that are naive. So this will be an identification or
true or false, and then filter the entire data object,
annotated data object for those IDs that were called naive. Because this will be the ones
that have in the truth. So now we are having another data object,
right? Or the same data object
modify where we have the same number of genes but
fewer amount of cells, correct? So the number of
observations are the cells, the number of variables in
this case are the genes. How many rows do we have
now in the observation? Well, we can look at them and as expected
the number of columns took is the same. But the number of rows should be
modified to the same number of cells that we have selected before. When we were doing this we run it
here we were active selecting for the IDs that were having the notation
of naive in the cell type column. We could also check about okay,
how many reads do we have? But how many reads we have now that
we have already filtered our data. So we are accessing the data frame that
we already filter with the expression, remember the six. And then we are summing up so
let's see what we get. And this is what we
are getting as a result, right? Summing up for every one of the cells,
how many results we get. We can also create data frame and
basically what we are getting here is a number of reads per
gene that we are getting. Why is this important? Because we are working with 20,153 genes. But because also we have
filtered some of the cells, it may happen that for
some of the genes we don't have reads, and if that's the case,
we may not want to work with them anymore. So that will help us identify elements at
the gene level that we want to take out. If we show now we have a new
object which we were showing already before that has
that number of genes and that number of cells, and
this is the dimensions for the matrix of the gene expression. And in addition we have the matrix for
the meta data. So we have go, we went through what is annotated data. What is this data structure,
important the package loading the data. Starting to look what is in the data. We have been able to modify slightly
the data, and of course we would like also to do additional things like
what we have free time elements. Maybe we want to write it, and
this is what we are going to do here. We are going to first import
a new package which is helping us to operate within the folders, we are going to ask,
is a path existing open data. If it does do nothing,
if not exist, then create the path. And once we are sure the path is created, we are going to save the annotated
data variable that we created only with naive cells as a new
file that contains only the naive cells. So let's run these, and
then we can see that within the new directory we have a file
that we aiming to create. As before we created it with this format,
H5 AD, okay? This is definitely very good for
reading and writing in terms of speed and
especially for very large files. But if you want to have CSB file,
comma separated values file, you can do also like that and
you can see we could create it like this, and then we list the files in our folder. Now we have also the files about CSB, right? The observations, the variables, the different data types that will
complete these annotated data structure. Because in this data structure is
not just a matrix of the linear expression versus the samples or
versus the cells in this case. It's also meta data,
matrix associated information, so all these will be written as CSB files
that you can access and look into. So what I would recommend
you before you go next and before you go to the exercise is redo
this, pause the video when you need. Make sure you are able to
understand every one of the steps, play a bit with the different parameters,
but also investigate the outcomes. Investigate the CSB files that were
generated here to see it's really are showing you the information that
you are expecting to have here. Remember these names here,
we discussed them in the video lecture. So if you don't remember them,
take a look.