In this video lecture will be
briefly touched on the basics of RNA-seq technology. This is a very extensive topic, and it deserves a dedicated course
to be properly explored. So we will describe only what we need
in order to continue the course, and sometimes the explanations that we
will provide will be intuitive. There is plenty of material available for
you to explore, and we will include some references
to it in the additional material. RNA-seq consists of several steps,
some of them conducted in the witlab and some of them in silica,
by silica we mean the data analysis. In the wit lab part biological
sample is processed in order to extract the messenger
RNA from the cells. This RNA is then prepared in libraries, which means segmenting the RNA
molecules into smaller fragments, and these fragments they're
process with a sequence that in order to get the nucleotides
of each one of these sequences. As a result from a given
sample we can get millions of short nucleotide sequences
that we will call reeds. Finally, because we expect those
reeds to be transcriptome, we expect them to be possibly
mapped to the genome. And through this mapping what
we do is to reach the final aim, which is quantifying how many reeds
belongs to each one of the genes. Through this process, as the outcome
we will produce a numerical vector for each biological sample. This vector contains the number
of reeds to each gene. This quantification represents our
estimate of the level of expression to that specific gene. But it is important to note that
RNA-seq data will always be composed by integral values
before further pre-processing. So we have basically count data. Also, it's important to notice
that the dimensionality of RNA-seq data is huge in the order
of tens of thousands of genes, and the values are quite sparse,
meaning that high proportion of genes may have
serial expression level. When multiple biological
samples are sequenced, RNA-seq data can be comfortably
represented as a matrix, usually with genes, the raws,
and samples in the columns. One key factor to consider before
starting any analysis is to address the sequence in depth, which means
the total amount of reeds collected for each one of the examples. Deeper sequencing means that a higher
number of reeds is available for characterizing the level of
expression of each one of the genes. Unfortunately, sequencing depth is
often different across samples, and this means that raw counts
are usually not comparable. If we take a look to this example,
we just can look into the second gene and observe different number
of rates per example. We can look into the third sample and we observe a larger number of
rates compared to the rest. But before having any conclusions, we will need to compare those
numbers with the sequencing depth. So what I'm saying is in order
to solve this challenge, the data needs to be normalized. The basic normalization process
involves computing the library size for example, which corresponds to
the total number of fritz, and then the normalized row counts
are computed by dividing each value for each gene by the total library
size associated to the sample. Because the resulting
values can be very small, usually they are multiplied
by a large scale factor. So this is the resulting matrix
after normalization in expression, values are now comparable
across the different samples. Very important, this is
the simplest type of normalization. However, more sophisticated
approaches do exist. Those approaches are required for
proper statistical analysis, and this is why we will be using
them in our coding lecture. The next recording session lesson
will focus on how to load and pre process RNA-seq count
matrixes in [INAUDIBLE]. Let's go for it.